# Chapter 8: Groundwater Simulation Models

*By Norman L. Jones and Gil Strassberg*

models 
Boundary 
Defines the 2D extent and orientation of a simulation model. 
Representation: Polygon features. 
Cell2D 
Represents cells or elements of a 2D simulation model or a single layer of a 3D model. 
Representation: Polygon features. 
Cell3D 
3D features representing cells or elements of a simulation model. 
Representation: Multipatch features. 
Node2D 
Represents the computational nodes of a 2D simulation model or a singe layer in a 3D model. 
Representation: Point features. 
Node3D 
3D points representing the computational nodes of a simulation model. 
Representation: PointZ features. 
ONE OF THE PRIMARY USES OF THE ARC HYDRO GROUNDWATER DATA MODEL IS to support integration of groundwater simulation models with GIS. Simulation models are used to build simplified mathematical representations of complex aquifer systems, to interpret the flow of water and transport of contaminants within an aquifer, and to predict how these will change under future stresses. Simulation models are used 

to assist water-resource managers in making decisions, balance the competing needs of ground- water stakeholders, predict the fate and migration of groundwater pollutants, and design strategies for remediating contaminated aquifers. Simula- tion models typically involve some type of numer- ical grid where the model inputs are discretized into values associated with grid cells. We can use standard GIS functionality to automate the process of preparing model inputs by discretizing spatial data layers (e.g., land cover, soils, elevation, and aquifer thickness) over the model grid. GIS also is ideal for organizing, archiving, and presenting results of simulation models. The results can be mapped in context with other spatial datasets to convey model results to decision makers and the public. Once stored within a geodatabase, model inputs and outputs can be served over the Internet in a simple format usable by any GIS user. 
In this chapter we review the more common types of simulation models and describe how groundwater models can be represented in the sim- ulation component of the groundwater data model. 
We present the concept of interface data models, which are extensions developed to store complete instances of simulation models. We also present 
Model ° boundary Wells {: °° 
4 ral an example of an interface data model, called the 
MODFLOW (modular finite-difference flow model) 
data model, for storing MODFLOW models. 
Types of simulation models 
Most groundwater simulation models fall into one of three categories: analytic element, finite element, and finite difference. For the analytic element method, principal features of aquifer systems such as rivers, flow barriers, zones of hydraulic conduc- tivity, and wells are represented using points, lines, and polygons (figure 8.1). A series of equations is then derived using principles of superposition, and a set of “strength coefficients” associated with the equations is computed. Once these coefficients are determined, the principal equations can be solved to simulate the water table elevation and flow quantities at any x,y location. The analytic element method has advantages over the finite element and finite difference methods in that there is no need to discretize the model domain. On the other hand, it requires more simplifying assump- tions than the other two methods and cannot be applied to certain situations involving complex geometry or heterogeneity. 
(b) 
[Figure 8.1] Analytic element model of an aquifer flow system: (a) model inputs such as rivers, wells, and the model boundary are defined via GIS features; and (b) head contours are generated by solving the analytic element equations. 
With the finite element method, the model domain is subdivided or discretized into small units called “elements.” For 2D simulations, the elements consist of triangle and quadrilateral 
(rectangular) shapes. For 3D simulations, the elements take the form of tetrahedra, prisms, hexahedra (“bricks”), or pyramids (figure 8.2). Properties such as permeability are assigned to the elements, and boundary conditions corresponding to aqui- fer stresses including wells, rivers, and drains are established. An equation is then established for each element that is related to the physics of the system being modeled. The element equations include the effect of the material properties, geom- etry, and boundary conditions. The element equa- tions are combined into a single global matrix, and the matrix is solved. The solution to the matrix consists of water table elevations and flow rates over the entire model domain. The finite element method can be used to simulate extremely com- plex geometries, but it is the most complex and computationally intensive of the three primary simulation methods. 
The most common type of groundwater simulation model is the finite difference method. 
With the finite difference method the model domain is represented using an orthogonal grid organized into rows and columns, and each rect- angular unit of the grid is called a cell. For 3D sim- ulations, layers are added to the model, and the cells are in the shape of regular hexahedra. Mate- rial properties and aquifer stresses are assigned to each of the cells in the grid. As in the case of the finite element method, a global set of equations is established and solved for the distribution of water levels and flow rates. The finite difference method is relatively simple and efficient and is the basis for the most widely used groundwater simulation model, MODFLOW, developed by the 
USGS (Harbaugh et al. 2000). Types of simulation models ssaaulbuq jo diop Auny ‘sn ayy jo Asayino 
[Figure 8.2] An example of a 3D finite element groundwater model. 
Geodatabase representation of simulation models 
The simulation component includes a set of feature classes that represent common modeling objects of finite element and finite difference models. The component includes five feature classes: Boundary, 
Cell2D, Cell3D, Node2D, and Node3D (figure 8.3). 
Boundary is a polygon feature class that represents the 2D extent of a simulation model. It is not an essential part of the numerical model rep- resentation, but it is useful for mapping the spatial domain of the model. For a finite-difference grid the Boundary feature would be in the shape of a rectangle, and for a finite element mesh it would be an irregular shape representing the outer perim- eter of the model. The Boundary feature class can include multiple polygon features that represent multiple models. This allows the development of a single layer to represent the extent of multiple simulation models. The attributes of Boundary features are shown in figure 8.4. 
[Figure 8.3] Analysis The geographic orientation of a model is defined by the model’s origin and the angle of rotation. 
In the following example (figure 8.5), the angle of rotation ¢ is defined as the angle between the north and the j axis (the axis defining columns in a MODFLOW model). The angle can be defined in various ways, thus how the angle is calculated 
=1 Boundary 
Polygon feature class representing the two-dimensional extent and orientation of simulation models 
Fieldname De HydrolD Unique feature identifier in the geodatabase used for creating relationships between classes of the data model. 
HydroCode Permanent public identifier of the feature used for relating features with external information systems. 
ModelDesc A text descriptor of the model. 
OriginX X coordinate of the model origin. 
OriginY ~ —_‘Y coordinate of the model origin. 
Angle The model angle of rotation. 
|FType Distinguishes between types of Boundary features. 
[Figure 8.4] Boundary feature class for representing the 2D extent of simulation models. 
L) er-)| 748) diagram showing the feature classes of the simulation component. 
HydroID 
HydroCode 
CelllD 
Cell2DID 
FType 
HydrolD 
HydroCode 
NodelD 
Cell3DID 
Node2DID 
FType 

should be documented in the metadata of the feature class. 
Cell2D is a polygon feature class that represents cells or elements associated with a 2D simulation model or a single layer of a3D model. To represent a 2D finite element mesh, Cell2D features would have a triangular or rectangular geometry repre- senting the elements of the model, and in a finite difference model Cell2D features would be rect- angular. Node2D is a point feature class that rep- resents the computational nodes in a simulation model (i.e., the locations at which the solution is computed). Node2D features are used in combina- tion with Cell2D features to represent the model’s mesh/ grid. [Figure 8.6] shows different options for using Cell2D and Node2D features. In a finite ele- ment model Node2D features would be located at the corners of the elements. For finite difference models there are two cases: Node2D features would correspond to cell corners for a mesh-cen- tered grid and to cell centers for the more common cell-centered grid. 
[Figure 8.5] Boundary features represent the spatial extent and orientation of a simulation model. 
The spatial orientation of the model is defined by the origin and angle of rotation. 
@ Node2D features (J Cell2D features 
= 
(c) (b) 
[Figure 8.6] Node2D and Cell2D features for common simulation grid types: (a) finite element, (6) mesh-centered finite difference, and (c) cell-centered finite difference. Geodatabase representation of simulation models 
Cell2D and Node2D features are used to represent 2D models, but can also be used in com- bination with 3D models. For 3D models, the 3D features represent the cells and nodes used by the simulation model, and the Cell2D and Node2D features are used to map either summary informa- tion (e.g., maximum concentration) from the 3D features or data associated with a selected layer of the 3D model grid. In some cases such as linked surface water-groundwater models, both a 2D grid and a 3D grid are used in the simulation. Attri- butes of Cell2D and Node2D features are shown in figure 8.7 and figure 8.8, respectively. 
Simulation model properties, input data, and outputs could be stored directly on the Cell2D wl Cell2D 
Polygon features representing cells or elements associated with a two- dimensional simulation model or a single layer of a three-dimensional model 
Fieldname Description 
HydrolD Unique feature identifier in the geodatabase used for creating relationships between classes of the data model. 
HydroCode Permanent public identifier of the feature used for relating features with external information systems. 
CelllD Index of the cell within the numbering scheme used for an individual layer of the computational grid. 
FType Distinguishes between types of Cell2D features. 
[Figure 8.7] Cell2 feature class for representing cells or elements in a 2D simulation model or a single layer of a 3D model. 
"+: IN ole (-¥4B) 
Point features representing the computational nodes in a simulation model 
Fieldname Description 
HydrolD Unique feature identifier in the geodatabase used for creating relationships between classes of the data model. 
HydroCode Permanent public identifier of the feature used for relating features with external information systems. 
NodelD Index of the node within the numbering scheme used for an individual layer of the computational grid. 
Cell2DID Index relating Node2D features with a Cell2D feature. 
FType Distinguishes between types of Node2D features. adl| 
[Figure 8.8] Node2D feature class for representing the computational nodes in a 2D simulation model or a single layer in a 3D model. 
and Node2D features, or they could be stored in separate tables and related to the features by association with the HydroID or the CellID. The relationship between Cell2D and Node2D is estab- lished through the Cell2DID-CellID relationship 
(figure 8.9). Each Node2D feature is indexed with a Cell2DID that is equal to the CellID of a Cell2D feature. For cell-centered finite difference grids, the relationship between cells and nodes is a one- to-one relationship since each cell is associated with a single node. For mesh-centered finite differ- ence and finite element models, a many-to-many approach is required as nodes can be related with multiple cells, and cells are associated with mul- tiple nodes. In this case an intermediate table will be developed relating Cell[D and NodeID values in a many-to-many relationship (see chapter 9 for more details on many-to-many relationships). 
A similar approach is used to represent a 3D model, but in this case the elements of the model grid are represented with 3D features. Cell3D is a multipatch feature class that represents 3D cells and elements; and Node3D is a z-enabled point feature class for representing the computational points of a 3D model grid. Cell3D and Node3D 
Cell2D: CelllD at 
Node : Cell2DID features are used mostly for visualization of 3D model data in ArcScene and less for data archiving. 
Attributes of Cell3D and Node3D features are shown in figure 8.10 and figure 8.11, respectively. 
Similarly to the Cell2D-Node2D relationship, 
Cell3D and Node3D features are also related with Cell2D and Node2D features (figure 8.12). 
Each Cell3D feature is attributed with a Cell2DID index that relates to the CellID of a Cell2D feature. 
Node3D features are indexed with a Node2DID that relates 3D nodes with a Node2D feature. 
Cell3D 
Multipatch features representing 
3D cells and elements of a simulation model 
Fieldname Description 
HydrolD Unique feature identifier in the geodatabase used for creating relationships between classes of the data model. 
HydroCode Permanent public identifier of the feature used for relating features with external information systems. 
CelllD Global index of the cell within the numbering scheme used for the computational grid. 
Cell2DID Index relating Cell3D features with a Cell2D feature. The 
Cell2DID of a Cell3D feature is equal to the CelllD of a Cell2D feature. 
|FType Distinguishes between types of Cell3D features. 
[Figure 8.10] Cell3D feature class for representing 3D cells and elements of a simulation model. 
(b) Cell2D: CelllD it M:N 
Node : NodelD 
[Figure 8.9] Relationship between Cell2D and Node2D features: a) Node2D features are indexed with a Cell2DID, which relates to the CelllD of a Cell2D feature; and b) Cell2D and Node2D features are related through a many-to-many relationship. 
As was the case with Node2D and Cell2D features, the relationship between Cell3D and 
Node3D features is established through the 
Cell3DID-CellID relationship (figure 8.13). Each 
Node3D feature is indexed with a Cell3DID, which is equal to the CellID of a Cell3D fea- ture. This one-to-one relationship is used for cell- centered finite difference grids where each cell is associated with a single node. A many-to-many approach is required for mesh-centered finite dif- ference and finite element models, as nodes can be related with multiple cells, and cells are associated with multiple nodes. 
Interface data models 
An Interface data model is a geodatabase design for storing the entire contents of a given simula- tion model. While the simulation component of the groundwater data model is general and may serve as a starting point for different types of projects and models, the objective of an interface data model is to mimic the inputs, outputs, and parameters of a numerical model, such that an entire model can be stored within the geodatabase. Storing the 
*-: I fore (=¥] B) 
3D point features representing computational nodes in a 3D simulation model grid 
Fieldname — Description = 
HydrolD Unique feature identifier in the geodatabase used for creating relationships between classes of the data model. 
HydroCode Permanent public identifier of the feature used for relating features with external information systems. 
NodelD Global index of the node within the numbering scheme used for the computational grid. 
Cell3DID Index relating Node3D features with a Cell3D feature. The 
Cell3DID of a Node3D feature is equal to the CelllD of a Cell3D feature, 
Node2DID Index relating Node3D features with a Node2D feature. The 
Node2DID of a Node3D feature is equal to the NodelD of a 
Node2D feature. 
FType Distinguishes between types of Node3D features, 
[Figure 8.11] Node3D feature class for representing computational nodes in a 3D model grid. Interface data models complete contents of a simulation model within a geodatabase provides advantages that include: 
¢ The integration of model data within a GIS environment, which provides the capability for visualizing, editing, and preprocessing model data and parameters using standard GIS tools. 
¢ Standard archiving format that supports queries, editing, versioning, etc. 
¢ The capability to publish model data on the 
Internet. 
Node2D : NodelD x 4:N 
Node3D : Node2DID Cell2D : CelllD 
AUN 
Call3D : Cell2DID 
[Figure 8.12] Relationship between 2D and 3D features: a) 
Cell3D features are indexed with a Cell2DID that relates to the CelllD of a Cell2D feature; and b) Node3D features are indexed with a Node2DID that relates to the NodelD of a 
Node2D feature. 
Cell3D : CelllD 
‘ M:N 
Node3D : NodelD Cell3D : CelllD 
\ 14 
Node3D : Cell3DID 
(a) 
[Figure 8.13] Relationship between Cell3D and Node3D features. Node3D features are indexed with a Cell3DID, which relates to the CelllD of the Cell3D. The Cell3D-Node3D relationship (a) is one-to-one for cell-centered grids, and 
(b) the relationship is many-to-many for mesh-centered grids or finite-element meshes. 
¢ Support for model integration by using the same underlying base datasets (e.g., the ones repre- sented by the groundwater data model). 
¢ The ability to build custom workflows within 
ArcGIS to automate tasks built on top of a simulation model (e.g., automated well permitting, capture zone analysis). 
While interface data models are self-contained as they describe a complete model, different models can be based on the same underlying datasets such as aquifer boundaries, streams, and well locations. 
These data layers are defined in the Arc Hydro data model, and a variety of simulation models can ref- erence the same underlying datasets through their interface data model (figure 8.14). 
MODFLOW data model 
The MODFLOW data model (MDM) is an interface data model developed as an extension to the 
Arc Hydro Groundwater data model. The MDM illustrates how the simulation feature dataset is used to support representation of groundwater simulation models. The MDM, a series of tables 
G | Ss Interface data Simulation models models (IDM) 
MODFLOW 
FEFLOW 
Hydro 
/  GeoSphere 
[Figure 8.14] |nterface data models store complete instances of simulation models within a geodatabase. 
A number of interface data models can be built on top of the basic datasets represented in the Arc Hydro data mode 
118 and relationships, supports the storage of an entire 
MODFLOW simulation within a geodatabase. 
Having the model data in the geodatabase makes it possible to use mapping and plotting capabili- ties of ArcGIS and to develop queries and tools, including tools for populating the MODFLOW package tables using data from the Arc Hydro components. The MDM provides an archival tool for models, facilitating scripting, permissions, check-in / check-out capabilities, and Web services. 
MODFLOW tables 
The bulk of MODFLOW data is stored in a series of tables. While it is impractical to present all of the tables here, a few examples are provided to demonstrate the main concepts. The tables associ- ated with the Layer-Property Flow (LPF) package are shown in figure 8.15. Variables associated with the LPF package are stored in the LPFVars table. 
Layer-based variables associated with the LPF package are stored in the LPFLayers table. LPF aquifer property arrays are stored in the LPFProp- erties table. The table includes one record for each cell in the MODFLOW grid. 
Most of the commonly used stress packages in 
MODFLOW follow a simple strategy. The cells associated with a given type of stress are identified, and an input entry is made for each instance in a list in the package input file. In some cases, mul- tiple entries are made for a given cell (e.g., three 
Layer-Property Flow (LPF) 
| == LPFVars z= LPFLayers == LPFProperties § 
HDRY Double Layer Long Int, 1K Long Int. 
WETFCT Double | LAYTYP | Short Int. | HK | Double | 
| IWETIT | Long int. | | LAYAVG | Short int. | | HANI | Double 
IHDWET Short int. | | CHANI Double | VKA Double 
: — = | LAYVKA Shortint. | | Ss Double 
| LAYWET Short Int. Sy Double 
_ AM_HK | Double | | WETDRY Double 
| AM_HANI | Double VKCB Double 
AM_VKA Double a 
AM_Ss Double 
AM_Sy Double 
|AM_WETDRY —_ Double 
AM_VKCB Double 
[Figure 8.15] Tables associated with the MODFLOW Layer- 
Property Flow (LPF) package. 

wells in a single cell). The River, Well, Drain, 
General Head Boundary, Constant-Head Boundary, and Horizontal Flow Barrier packages follow this format. Data associated with these packages are stored in a series of tables, one per package 
(figure 8.16). Each record in the tables corresponds to an instance of the given stress at a particular cell for a particular time (stress period). The SPID field refers to the ID of the stress period. Data defining each stress period are stored in a stress periods table. The names of the fields that store the prop- erties used by each package are derived from the variable names used by MODFLOW. 
In a similar fashion, the MODFLOW data model includes tables for representing many of the pack- ages used by MODFLOW. The full MDM can be viewed at (www. archydrogw. com). 
Feature classes 
The foundation of the MODFLOW data model is the Cell2D and Node2D feature classes. MOD- 
FLOW uses a cell-centered finite difference approach where the grid is organized in layers. 
Within each layer, the cells are ordered by rows and columns. As a result, each cell has a row (I), column (J), and layer (K) index. There is one Cell2D and one Node2D feature for each IJ-combination 
List-based stress packages © 
WK | Long Int. IJK Long Int. ‘WK Long Int. 
| SPID Long Int. SPID Long int. | | SPID | Long Int. 
Stage Double Shead Double Q Double 
| Cond Double Ehead Double | Ofact Double 
Rbot Double Shdfact Double FACE Long Int. 
IFACE Long Int. Ehdfact Double SourcelD Long Int. 
Condfact Double SourcelD Long Int. LinearScale Double 
SourcelD Long Int. LinearScale Double aaa 
LinearScale Double = = 
WK Long Int. 1K Long Int. 1JK1 Long Int. | 
SPID Long Int. SPID Long Int. WWK2 Long Int. 
Elevation Double Bhead Double Hydehr Double 
Cond | Double Cond Double Factor Double 
| Long Int. Long Int, | 
| Double 
| Long Int 
| Double | IFACE 
| Condfact 
4 SourcelD 
| LinearScale 
MESSE TIE _ Long Int 
Double 
| Long Int. 
| Double |_| SourcelD 
) | SourcelD 
|_| LinearScale 
[Figure 8.16] Tables associated with list-based MODFLOW stress packages. MODFLOW data model! 
in the MODFLOW grid. For example, the Cell2D and Node2D features represent a single layer of the MODFLOW grid. Cell2D and Node2D features are then joined with MODFLOW data in tables to generate map layers. Node3D and Cell3D fea- tures are optional and can be used to display 3D 
MODFLOW data in ArcScene. 
To facilitate joins and queries related to the 
MODFLOW data, the MDM includes a CellIndex table (figure 8.17). In the MODFLOW input files, cells are identified by a combination of three integers representing the row, column, and layer indices of the cell (I, J, K). Since joins can only be accomplished using a single field, it is necessary to generate an integer field corresponding to a unique 
IJK combination. Furthermore, some MODFLOW input arrays are fundamentally 2D in nature (e.g., evapotranspiration and recharge) and require an integer identifier corresponding to a unique IJ combination. The IJK field of the CellIndex table is populated from the I, J, and K values by starting at a value of one for the cell corresponding to I = 1,J 
= 1,and K = 1, looping through the cells in the grid row-by-row within each layer, and incrementing 
CellIndex Table 
I K | 0 | DK 
5a fs (a a i 
Tl ea ee 2 aoe |e |S 3 
15 (E4nleom ae 4 li eels 5 
LipeL ice jleee 6 
AP SoiE wy 7 
2/4/18 8 ee Se ie 9 
Su (B20 On| O 
<¥ e Letl ee  ee 
TG ee ee 
1 ey 13 
‘ial age Pg [a 14 
Ty en eee ae i5 dul e4u lene ie 
20 ean es 17 
| ae as 18 
7a al ee i9 aC aon eae 
35 |e euro 24 
Seale rom o> 
Suiien eo ian mosey mice eee 
[Figure 8.17] The Cellindex table is used to join tables and features in the MODFLOW data model. 
the index by one as shown in figure 8.17. The IJ values are numbered similarly, but the numbering is repeated in each layer. 
When used in conjunction with the MODFLOW data model, Cell2D and Node2D features include an IJ field, and Cell3D and Node3D features include an IJK field, where the IJ and IJK fields are populated using the strategy used in the Cel- 
IIndex table (the IJ and IJK fields are equivalent to the CellID fields). For single-layer models or for 2D arrays (recharge, evapotranspiration, etc.), the MODFLOW tables can be joined directly to the Node2D and Cell2D features. For multilayer models and 3D arrays, the MODFLOW tables are first joined with the CellIndex table using the IJK field, and the result is then joined with Node2D or 
Cell2D features through the IJ field. For example, a map layer illustrating hydraulic conductivity values could be generated by first joining the JK field of the LPFProperties table to the IJK field of the CellIndex table. The IJ field of the resulting temporary table would then be joined to the IJ field of the Cell2D feature class. The values asso- ciated with individual grid layers in the resulting map layer can be displayed using a definition query (“CellIndex.K = 1, CellIndex.K = 2, etc.). For transient models, a definition query on the SPID field can also be used to view the values associ- ated with a particular stress period. Joins can be performed with Cell3D and Node3D features in a similar fashion. 
Map layers of MODFLOW data associated with cell and node features can be symbolized and toggled on/off independently from other features in the table of contents (TOC) window in ArcMap and ArcScene. For example, data from a MOD- 
FLOW model of the Barton Spring region of the 
Edwards Aquifer was imported into the MOD- 
FLOW data model tables and by joining Cell2D and Node2D features with the tables a display of the MODFLOW data was created in ArcMap 
(figure 8.18). 
MODFLOW Analyst 
The MODFLOW data model provides the foundation upon which a rich suite of tools and utilities are constructed. The existence of a stan- dard, the open nature of the data model, and the implementation of the data model in a fully scriptable GIS environment opens a new field of applications and research related to MODFLOW modeling. A suite of tools named “MODFLOW 
Analyst” has been developed as part of the Arc 
Hydro Groundwater tools. MODFLOW Analyst is used for building and managing MOD- 
FLOW models via the Arc Hydro Groundwater and MODFLOW data models. Most of the tools associated with MODFLOW Analyst are coded as ArcGIS geoprocessing (GP) tools (figure 8.19). 
This allows easy use from any ArcGIS application 
(ArcMap, ArcCatalog, ArcScene, or ArcGlobe). In addition, users can leverage the GP tools to create more advanced tools, or to combine a number of tools into models to support custom workflows. 
DI eR 
Boe eee / h pieog juawdojanaq 
Jayeny sexal pue Aanins jeo!16o}0a5 “s‘fq Jo Asaqinod eyeq Bottom 
Elevation 
115 to 320 
(EIR 220 10 545 
HERB 545 to 205 
HE Waterboay 
——— WaterLine 
{___] Watershed 
Edwards Aquifer 
< [___] outerop 
Confine 
Pr comes 
[Figure 8.18] MODFLOW model of the Barton Spring segment of the Edwards Aquifer. Cell bottom elevations are displayed with Cell2D features, and springs modeled as 
“Drains” in MODFLOW are displayed with Node2D features. 

of oaaenby Jo Asaq1no0> MODFLOW Analyst includes the following sets tools: 
Import/export tools: The Import MODFLOW 
Simulation tool imports a set of MODFLOW input files; builds the Boundary, Node2D and 
Cell2D features; and populates the appropriate tables in the MODFLOW data model. The tool uses a modified version of the MODFLOW code to read the model and then writes the features and tables using ArcObjects from within MOD- 
FLOW. Tools are also provided for exporting the components of a MODFLOW data model to individual MODFLOW input files. 
View tools: View tools create spatial views (map layers) of model inputs and results by join- ing tables in the MODFLOW data model with 
Cell2D and Node2D features. Simple filters can be used to view a selected MODFLOW grid layer or stress period and include only active cells in the query. 
pole a [Figure 8.19] 
MODFLOW Analyst geoprocessing 4rcToolbox i & 30 Analyst Tools 
4) Analysis Tools 
=) Arc Hydro Groundwater Tools 
&) & Groundwater Analyst 
= -& MODFLOW Analyst 
 & Export (BETA) 
=) & Features 
@ Boundary to DIS 
@ Boundary to DIS Refine Points 
@ Build Boundary Rectangle 
# Create MODFLOW Cell2D 
@ Create MODFLOW Cell3D 
# Create MODFLOW Node2D 
@ Create MODFLOW Node3D 
# OIS to Boundary 
1) & Import 
@ Add Output File 
F Fill Output Arrays 
@ \nport MODFLOW Madel 
A Inport MODFLOW Output 
# import MODFLOW Tables 
@ import Simulated Equivalents m-& Run 
3) &S Stress Periods i & Tables i) & Utilities i & Views 
6 & Well Permitting 
# & Sample Utilities 
# & Setup 
#) & Subsurface Analyst tools (part of the 
Arc Hydro Groundwater tools). MODFLOW data model 
Building model input: One of the main benefits of the MODFLOW data model is that it facili- tates the use of GIS features to construct model input. MODFLOW Analyst includes a suite of tools for populating the tables in the MODFLOW data model with new records using GIS features 
(points, lines, and polygons). These features are typically associated with the framework compo- nent of Arc Hydro, but the tools are developed in a generic fashion such that any set of features can be used. For example, a layer of polylines representing streams can be used to generate a new instance of the MODFLOW river package input. The high-level GP tools that build input data for a particular package are layered on top of low-level GP tools that overlay features with 
Cell2D polygons to find intersections, and lowlevel GP tools for intersecting generic time series data with stress periods. 
Custom workflows: With the MODFLOW 
Analyst tools as a foundation, it is possible to develop more advanced tools and custom workflows. For example, MODFLOW Analyst can be used for automated well permitting. This process consists of a few simple tools: 
1. Import MODFLOW Model: The MODFLOW model for the region in question is imported to ArcGIS. This model represents a calibrated steady-state model representing average current aquifer conditions. 
2. Establish Baseline Model: This tool adds a few supplemental tables to the system to manage the well-permitting process. It also takes simulated flows at selected rivers and water bodies representing baseline conditions and converts them to “observations” in the 
MODFLOW observations (OBS) process. 
3. Create Well Feature: This tool is used to input the coordinates of a candidate well and create anew well in the Well feature class. 
4. Create MODFLOW Well Records: This tool takes the new well and an associated dis- charge rate and creates a corresponding record in the Well Package table. 
5. Analyze Well: This tool saves a copy of the modified well package and runs a new 
MODLFOW simulation. The resulting flows at selected rivers and water bodies are com- puted by the MODFLOW OBS process and are compared to baseline conditions. The changes resulting from the new well are calculated and tabulated in a report. 
6. Reject Well: If a well is rejected, this tool is used to delete the candidate well from the database and restore the model to the baseline conditions. 
7. Accept Well: If a well is accepted, this tool is used to convert the candidate well to a perma- nent well and to update the baseline condition of the model to include the new well. 
In a similar fashion, workflows can be constructed for parameter estimation, Monte Carlo simula- tions, and risk analysis. Given that the data model is organized in a database, it is possible to define custom permissions for each user of the database. 
The data model can be stored on a central server, and Web services could access and manage the model remotely or via a Web interface. 
Steps for implementing the 
Simulation component 
This section outlines the main steps involved in populating the classes of the simulation compo- nent and integrating simulation models into the 
Arc Hydro Groundwater geodatabase. The first steps involved in implementing this component are to refine the geodatabase design to meet your specific project needs (see chapters 2 and 9 for a detailed description of these steps). For example, in the following case we use tables from the MOD- 
FLOW data model to store simulation outputs; these tables are not part of the core Arc Hydro 
Groundwater design but were added to complement the data model for a specific use, representing MODFLOW simulations. To start populating the simulation component you need to define the boundary of your model. You can then import/ create Cell2D/Node2D and Cell3D/Node3D fea- tures. The features will be created based on the model discretization information (the number of layers, rows, and columns, and the grid spacing). 
Once your model grid/mesh is defined you can use custom tools to import/create model data or to export native model input files from GIS fea- tures. In the case of MODFLOW, the MODFLOW 
Analyst tools automate the process of creating the features, tables, and map layers. Finally, you can use the results of this process to create products such as maps, scenes, and reports. In addition you can develop custom workflows to support model- ing related tasks. The following checklist provides a summary of the main steps for implementing the simulation component. 

Steps for implementing the Simulation component 
Checklist 
1. Create the classes of the simulation component 7. Visualize model data and create products (maps, 
(manually using ArcCatalog or by importing from scenes, reports) 
an XML schema) 
2. Add project specific classes, attributes, relationships, and domains as necessary 8. Develop custom workflows 
Piretrnert catacewlendi chances made to the dats The following example illustrates the representamodel tion of a simulation model using the classes of the 
4. Define the boundary of your model in the Bound- simulation component. As part of the Texas Water ary feature class Development Boards’ Groundwater Availabil- 
5. Import or create model grid/mesh features (Cell2D, ity Modeling (GAM) program, three MODFLOW 
Cell3D, Node2D, and Node3D) models covering the Edwards Aquifer were devel- 
6. Apply tools to: oped for simulating future groundwater availabil- 
1) Import model data into the geodatabase ity in the aquifer. In this example we focus on the 
2) Populate/edit model data using ArcGIS standard model of the Barton Springs segment of the aquifer tools (Scanlon et al. 2001), highlighted in figure 8.20. 
3) Export model data to native model input files 
BB Attributes of Boundary, 
[Figure 8.20] The spatial location and orientation of a simulation model! are defined by the model 
Record: 1 aa =) >t ee Show: rw Selected | Records (1 out of 3 Selected) Options — = boundary. Highlighted is the boundary of the Barton Springs 
S t of ahs Norfiern serie groundwater availability model. 
Barton Springs Segment pieog juaudojanag jajeM sexal Jo Asaqyinod Beg 
San Antonio Segment 
The Import MODFLOW Model tool (part of the 
MODFLOW Analyst tools) was used to import the 
Barton Spring model. Inputs to the tool include the X and Y origin of the model and its angle of rotation, which define the location of the model in world coordinate space (figure 8.21). The length, width, and depth of the model are defined by the grid geometry as described in the discretization 
(DIS) portion of the MODFLOW input files. 
[Figure 8.22] shows the Cell2D and Node2D features created from the discretization informa- tion. Node2D features are located at the center of 
Cell2D features. The origin of the model is at the upper left corner of the boundary, thus the top left cell will be the first cell of the model grid (I = 1, 
J = 1, K = 1) and is assigned an index IJ = 1. The 
MODFLOW data model uses an IJ field that is equivalent to the more generic CellID and NodeID indices defined by Arc Hydro Groundwater. 
cee 1] 
2 |Polygon 2 
3 |Polygon 3 
4 |Polygon 4 
5 |Polygon t 5 
6 |Polygon i 6) 
ae | 70 
8 |/Polygon { 8 
3 [Polygon alii 9 ak Record: 14} 4 0 Import MODFLOW Model of Rotation —_ 
Output MODFLOW Boundary FeatureClass 
| | C:\BartonSpringsModel. mdb \modflow\Boundary ae Cell20 Feature Class 
[Figure 8.21] The Import MODFLOW Model tool imports a complete MODFLOW model into the geodatabase and creates Boundary, Cell2D, and Node2D features to repre- sent the model grid. 
[Figure 8.22] Cell2D and Node2D features representing the grid of a MODFLOW model. 
o 2: Nn o i 
WM) Bw ies | m 
124 oanenby jo Asaqyino> 

The top and bottom elevations of the model cells can be imported from the discretization (DIS) file and read into the TopElev and BotmElev tables of the MODFLOW data model. Based on these elevations and the Node2D and Cell2D features, 
Node3D and Cell3D features can be created to visualize the model in ArcScene. [Figure 8.23] shows an example of Cell3D features representing a 3D 
MODFLOW model grid rendered in ArcScene. 
In addition to viewing the model grid and inputs, one can also run the model and visualize the results. 
The Import MODFLOW Output tool (part of the 
MODFLOW Analyst tools) was used to import the MODFLOW outputs (heads, drawdown, flow) 
into the appropriate tables of the MODFLOW data model. [Figure 8.24] shows simulated heads imported into the OutputHead table of the MOD- 
FLOW data model. Each head value is indexed with an IJK attribute relating the computed head value with a MODFLOW cell, and the head Steps for implementing the Simulation component values are also indexed with a TimelID attribute giving the time step of the model. 
#2 Attributes of OutputHead | 
[object n°] Time | seh at 
333, 334 | 
9335) 
220 oe 
Record; | af) Ti >in 
[Figure 8.24] Simulated heads stored in the OutputHead table of the MODFLOW data model. 
Oadrenby ‘ZUIMO|IWS a}jaydI\ JO AsayunoD 
Fie 
[Figure 8.23] Cell3D features representing a 3D MODFLOW model grid rendered in ArcScene. Each cell in the model is represented by a Cell3D feature. Cells are symbolized to show the different hydrogeologic units. 
Once the model data is in the geodatabase, model inputs and outputs can be visualized and analyzed by joining the tabular data (e.g., simu- lated heads) with Cell2D, Node2D, Cell3D, and 
Node3D features and creating data layers representing model data and results. For example, a head map can be created by joining Cell2D fea- tures with the output head table. Filtering the new layer for a TimeID will result in a head map for the selected model time step. In addition, time series can be plotted for specific cells of interest, and ani- mations can be created to display changes over time (figure 8.25). 
Output Heads 
430-500 
HE 501 - 600 
HEBER 601 - 700 
HE 70: - 800 
BE 0: - 200 
He 20: - References 
Harbaugh, A. W., E. R. Banta, M. C. Hill, and M. G. McDonald. 2000. MODFLOW-2000, the U.S. Geological Survey modular ground-water model—User guide to modular- ization concepts and the Ground-Water Flow Process: U.S. 
Geological Survey Open-File Report 00-92. 
Scanlon, B. R., R. E. Mace, Brian Smith, S. D. Hovorka, A. 
R. Dutton, and R. C. Reedy. 2001. Groundwater availability of the Barton Springs segment of the Edwards aquifer, 
Texas—numerical simulations through 2050: The University of Texas at Austin, Bureau of Economic Geology. 
[Figure 8.25] Map of simulated heads from a MODFLOW model of the Barton Springs segment of the Edwards 
Aquifer. Also shown is a plot of simulated heads of a drain cell representing Barton Springs. 
pieog Juawidojanag Jajem sexa| pue Aanins je160]0a5 *s'fq Jo Asaqinod eleq 
Legend e Drains 
BE Wiatervoay ae | Watershed 
Edwards Aquifer |) 
TimeID
